11149940	Essential role of the small GTPase Rac in disease resistance of rice.	2001	Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A	Production of reactive oxygen intermediates (ROI) and a form of programmed cell death called hypersensitive response (HR) are often associated with disease resistance of plants. We have previously shown that the Rac homolog of rice, OsRac1, is a regulator of ROI production and cell death in rice. Here we show that the constitutively active OsRac1 (i) causes HR-like responses and greatly reduces disease lesions against a virulent race of the rice blast fungus; (ii) causes resistance against a virulent race of bacterial blight; and (iii) causes enhanced production of a phytoalexin and alters expression of defense-related genes. The dominant-negative OsRac1 suppresses elicitor-induced ROI production in transgenic cell cultures, and in plants suppresses the HR induced by the avirulent race of the fungus. Taken together, our findings strongly suggest that OsRac1 has a general role in disease resistance of rice.
12237405	The heterotrimeric G protein alpha subunit acts upstream of the small GTPase Rac in disease resistance of rice.	2002	Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A	We used rice dwarf1 (d1) mutants lacking a single-copy Galpha gene and addressed Galpha's role in disease resistance. d1 mutants exhibited a highly reduced hypersensitive response to infection by an avirulent race of rice blast. Activation of PR gene expression in the leaves of the mutants infected with rice blast was delayed for 24 h relative to the wild type. H(2)O(2) production and PR gene expression induced by sphingolipid elicitors (SE) were strongly suppressed in d1 cell cultures. Expression of the constitutively active OsRac1, a small GTPase Rac of rice, in d1 mutants restored SE-dependent defense signaling and resistance to rice blast. Galpha mRNA was induced by an avirulent race of rice blast and SE application on the leaf. These results indicated the role of Galpha in R gene-mediated disease resistance of rice. We have proposed a model for the defense signaling of rice in which the heterotrimeric G protein functions upstream of the small GTPase OsRac1 in the early steps of signaling.
14605221	Conserved subgroups and developmental regulation in the monocot rop gene family.	2003	Plant Physiol	Rop small GTPases are plant-specific signaling proteins with roles in pollen and vegetative cell growth, abscisic acid signal transduction, stress responses, and pathogen resistance. We have characterized the rop family in the monocots maize (Zea mays) and rice (Oryza sativa). The maize genome contains at least nine expressed rops, and the fully sequenced rice genome has seven. Based on phylogenetic analyses of all available Rops, the family can be subdivided into four groups that predate the divergence of monocots and dicots; at least three have been maintained in both lineages. However, the Rop family has evolved differently in the two lineages, with each exhibiting apparent expansion in different groups. These analyses, together with genetic mapping and identification of conserved non-coding sequences, predict orthology for specific rice and maize rops. We also identified consensus protein sequence elements specific to each Rop group. A survey of ROP-mRNA expression in maize, based on multiplex reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and a massively parallel signature sequencing database, showed significant spatial and temporal overlap of the nine transcripts, with high levels of all nine in tissues in which cells are actively dividing and expanding. However, only a subset of rops was highly expressed in mature leaves and pollen. Intriguingly, the grouping of maize rops based on hierarchical clustering of expression profiles was remarkably similar to that obtained by phylogenetic analysis. We hypothesize that the Rop groups represent classes with distinct functions, which are specified by the unique protein sequence elements in each group and by their distinct expression patterns.
10485927	The small GTP-binding protein rac is a regulator of cell death in plants.	1999	Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A	Cell death plays important roles in the development and defense of plants as in other multicellular organisms. Rapid production of reactive oxygen species often is associated with plant defense against pathogens, but their molecular mechanisms are not known. We introduced the constitutively active and the dominant negative forms of the small GTP-binding protein OsRac1, a rice homolog of human Rac, into the wild type and a lesion mimic mutant of rice and analyzed H(2)O(2) production and cell death in transformed cell cultures and plants. The results indicate that Rac is a regulator of reactive oxygen species production as well as cell death in rice.
15951489	A sphingolipid elicitor-inducible mitogen-activated protein kinase is regulated by the small GTPase OsRac1 and heterotrimeric G-protein in rice 1[w].	2005	Plant Physiol	Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades are activated in plants during responses to pathogens or to pathogen-derived elicitors and mediate intracellular stress responses. Here, we show that a rice (Oryza sativa) MAPK, OsMAPK6, was posttranslationally activated in a cell culture by a sphingolipid elicitor. Suppression of OsMAPK6 expression by RNA interference resulted in a strong reduction of pathogen-induced Phe ammonia-lyase mRNA, whereas the mRNA level of another rice MAPK, OsMAPK5a, was highly increased. Silencing of a small GTPase, OsRac1, by RNA interference or loss-of-function mutation (d1) of the heterotrimeric G-protein alpha-subunit gene resulted in a strong reduction of the OsMAPK6 protein levels and of kinase activation by a sphingolipid elicitor. Furthermore, coimmunoprecipitation experiments with OsRac1 and OsMAPK6 proteins showed that OsMAPK6 is closely associated with the active form of OsRac1, but not with inactive forms of OsRac1. These results indicate that these two G-proteins regulate an elicitor-inducible MAPK in rice at the protein level.
15220467	Down-regulation of metallothionein, a reactive oxygen scavenger, by the small GTPase OsRac1 in rice.	2004	Plant Physiol	Metallothioneins are small, ubiquitous Cys-rich proteins known to be involved in reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging and metal homeostasis. We found that the expression of a metallothionein gene (OsMT2b) was synergically down-regulated by OsRac1 and rice (Oryza sativa) blast-derived elicitors. Transgenic plants overexpressing OsMT2b showed increased susceptibility to bacterial blight and blast fungus. OsMT2b-overexpressing cells showed reduced elicitor-induced hydrogen peroxide production. In contrast, homozygous OsMT2b::Tos17-inserted mutant and OsMT2b-RNAi-silenced transgenic cells showed significantly higher elicitor-induced hydrogen peroxide production than the wild-type cells. In vitro assay showed that recombinant OsMT2b protein possessed superoxide- and hydroxyl radical-scavenging activities. Taken together, these results showed that OsMT2b is an ROS scavenger and its expression is down-regulated by OsRac1, thus potentiating ROS, which function as signals in resistance response. The results suggest that OsRac1 plays a dual role as an inducer of ROS production and a suppressor of ROS scavenging.
16172097	RNA silencing of single and multiple members in a gene family of rice.	2005	Plant Physiol	RNA silencing with inverted repeat (IR) constructs has been used to suppress gene expression in various organisms. However, the transitive RNA-silencing effect described in plants may preclude the use of RNA silencing for a gene family. Here, we show that, in rice (Oryza sativa), transitive RNA silencing (spreading of double-stranded RNA along the target mRNA) occurred with the green fluorescent protein transgene but not with the endogenous phytoene desaturase gene. We fused IR copies of unique 3' untranslated regions derived from the rice OsRac gene family to a strong promoter and stably introduced them into rice. Each of the seven members of the OsRac gene family was specifically suppressed by its respective IR construct. We also examined IR constructs in which multiple 3' untranslated regions were fused and showed that three members of the OsRac gene family were effectively suppressed by a single construct. Using highly conserved regions of the two members of the OsRac gene family, we also suppressed the expression of all members of the gene family with variable efficiencies. These results suggest that RNA silencing is a useful method for the functional analysis of gene families in rice and other plants.
16531052	Functional characterization of OsRacB GTPase--a potentially negative regulator of basal disease resistance in rice.	2006	Plant Physiol Biochem	The rice genome contains at least seven expressed Rop small GTPase genes. Of these Rops, OsRac1 is the only characterized gene that has been implicated in disease resistance as a positive regulator. To our interest in finding a negative ROP regulator of disease resistance in rice, we applied a "phylogeny of function" approach to rice Rops, and identified OsRacB based on its close genetic orthologous relationship with the barley HvRacB gene, a known negative regulator of disease resistance. To determine the function of OsRacB, we isolated the OsRacB cDNA and conducted gene expression and transgenic studies. OsRacB, a single copy gene in the genome of rice, shared 98% identity with HvRacB at the amino acid level. Its mRNA was strongly expressed in leaf sheath (LS) and in panicles, but was very weakly expressed in young and mature leaves. The basal mRNA level of OsRacB in LS of two-week-old seedlings was strongly down-regulated upon wounding by cut and treatment with jasmonic acid. A dramatic down-regulation in the OsRacB transcripts was also found in plants inoculated with the blast pathogen, Magnaporthe grisea. Interestingly, transgenic rice plants over-expressing OsRacB showed increased symptom development in response to rice blast pathogens. Additionally, fluorescence microscopy of green fluorescent protein (GFP):OsRacB-transformed onion cells and Arabidopsis protoplasts revealed OsRacB association with plasma membrane (PM), suggesting that PM localization is required for proper function of OsRacB. Based on these results, we suggest that OsRacB functions as a potential regulator for a basal disease resistance pathway in rice.
16380417	Cinnamoyl-CoA reductase, a key enzyme in lignin biosynthesis, is an effector of small GTPase Rac in defense signaling in rice.	2006	Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A	OsRac1, one of the Rac/Rop family of small GTPases, plays important roles in defense responses, including a role in the production of reactive oxygen species mediated by NADPH oxidase. We have identified an effector of OsRac1, namely rice (Oryza sativa) cinnamoyl-CoA reductase 1 (OsCCR1), an enzyme involved in lignin biosynthesis. Lignin, which is polymerized through peroxidase activity by using H(2)O(2) in the cell wall, is an important factor in plant defense responses, because it presents an undegradable mechanical barrier to most pathogens. Expression of OsCCR1 was induced by a sphingolipid elicitor, suggesting that OsCCR1 participates in defense signaling. In in vitro interaction and two-hybrid experiments, OsRac1 was shown to bind OsCCR1 in a GTP-dependent manner. Moreover, the interaction of OsCCR1 with OsRac1 led to the enzymatic activation of OsCCR1 in vitro. Transgenic cell cultures expressing the constitutively active OsRac1 accumulated lignin through enhanced CCR activity and increased reactive oxygen species production. Thus, it is likely that OsRac1 controls lignin synthesis through regulation of both NADPH oxidase and OsCCR1 activities during defense responses in rice.
18156215	Regulation of rice NADPH oxidase by binding of Rac GTPase to its N-terminal extension.	2007	Plant Cell	Reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced by NADPH oxidase play critical roles in various cellular activities, including plant innate immunity response. In contrast with the large multiprotein NADPH oxidase complex of phagocytes, in plants, only the homologs of the catalytic subunit gp91phox and the cytosolic regulator small GTPase Rac are found. Plant homologs of the gp91phox subunit are known as Rboh (for respiratory burst oxidase homolog). Although numerous Rboh have been isolated in plants, the regulation of enzymatic activity remains unknown. All rboh genes identified to date possess a conserved N-terminal extension that contains two Ca2+ binding EF-hand motifs. Previously, we ascertained that a small GTPase Rac (Os Rac1) enhanced pathogen-associated molecular pattern-induced ROS production and resistance to pathogens in rice (Oryza sativa). In this study, using yeast two-hybrid assay, we found that interaction between Rac GTPases and the N-terminal extension is ubiquitous and that a substantial part of the N-terminal region of Rboh, including the two EF-hand motifs, is required for the interaction. The direct Rac-Rboh interaction was supported by further studies using in vitro pull-down assay, a nuclear magnetic resonance titration experiment, and in vivo fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) microscopy. The FRET analysis also suggests that cytosolic Ca2+ concentration may regulate Rac-Rboh interaction in a dynamic manner. Furthermore, transient coexpression of Os Rac1 and rbohB enhanced ROS production in Nicotiana benthamiana, suggesting that direct Rac-Rboh interaction may activate NADPH oxidase activity in plants. Taken together, the results suggest that cytosolic Ca2+ concentration may modulate NADPH oxidase activity by regulating the interaction between Rac GTPase and Rboh.
18156216	RAR1 and HSP90 form a complex with Rac/Rop GTPase and function in innate-immune responses in rice.	2007	Plant Cell	A rice (Oryza sativa) Rac/Rop GTPase, Os Rac1, is involved in innate immunity, but its molecular function is largely unknown. RAR1 (for required for Mla12 resistance) and HSP90 (a heat shock protein 90 kD) are important components of R gene-mediated disease resistance, and their function is conserved in several plant species. HSP90 has also recently been shown to be important in mammalian innate immunity. However, their functions at the molecular level are not well understood. In this study, we examined the functional relationships between Os Rac1, RAR1, and HSP90. Os RAR1-RNA interference (RNAi) rice plants had impaired basal resistance to a compatible race of the blast fungus Magnaporthe grisea and the virulent bacterial blight pathogen Xanthomonas oryzae. Constitutively active Os Rac1 complemented the loss of resistance, suggesting that Os Rac1 and RAR1 are functionally linked. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments with rice cell culture extracts indicate that Rac1 forms a complex with RAR1, HSP90, and HSP70 in vivo. Studies with Os RAR1-RNAi and treatment with geldanamycin, an HSP90-specific inhibitor, showed that RAR1 and HSP90 are essential for the Rac1-mediated enhancement of pathogen-associated molecular pattern-triggered immune responses in rice cell cultures. Furthermore, the function of HSP90, but not RAR1, may be essential for their association with the Rac1 complex. Os Rac1 also regulates RAR1 expression at both the mRNA and protein levels. Together, our results indicate that Rac1, RAR1, HSP90, and HSP70 form one or more protein complexes in rice cells and suggest that these proteins play important roles in innate immunity in rice.
16384895	Proteomics of Rac GTPase signaling reveals its predominant role in elicitor-induced defense response of cultured rice cells.	2006	Plant Physiol	We have previously shown that a human small GTPase Rac homolog, OsRac1, from rice (Oryza sativa) induces cascades of defense responses in rice plants and cultured cells. Sphingolipid elicitors (SEs) have been similarly shown to activate defense responses in rice. Therefore, to systematically analyze proteins whose expression levels are altered by OsRac1 and/or SE treatment, we performed a differential display analysis of proteins by the use of two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry. A total of 271 proteins whose expression levels were altered by constitutively active (CA)-OsRac1 or SE were identified. Interestingly, of 100 proteins that were up-regulated by a SE, 87 were also induced by CA-OsRac1, suggesting that OsRac1 plays a pivotal role in defense responses induced by SE in cultured rice cells. In addition, CA-OsRac1 induces the expression of 119 proteins. Many proteins, such as pathogenesis-related proteins, SGT1, and prohibitin, which are known to be involved in the defense response, were found among these proteins. Proteins involved in redox regulation, chaperones such as heat shock proteins, BiP, and chaperonin 60, proteases and protease inhibitors, cytoskeletal proteins, subunits of proteasomes, and enzymes involved in the phenylpropanoid and ethylene biosynthesis pathways were found to be induced by CA-OsRac1 or SE. Results of our proteomic analysis revealed that OsRac1 is able to induce many proteins in various signaling and metabolic pathways and plays a predominant role in the defense response in cultured rice cells.
16556979	Expression analysis of genes for callose synthases and Rho-type small GTP-binding proteins that are related to callose synthesis in rice anther.	2006	Biosci Biotechnol Biochem	The most chilling-sensitive stage of rice has been found to be at the onset of microspore release. The microsporocytes produce a wall of callose between the primary cell wall and the plasma membrane, and it has been shown that precise regulation of callose synthesis and degradation in anther is essential for fertile pollen formation. In this study, genes for 10 callose synthases in the rice genome were fully annotated and phylogenetically analyzed. Expression analysis of these genes showed that OsGSL5, an ortholog of microsporogenesis-related AtGSL2, was specifically expressed in anthers, and was notably downregulated by cooling treatment. Gene expression profiles of Rho-type small GTP-binding proteins in rice anther were also analyzed. The mechanisms of callose synthesis in rice pollen formation and its relationships with cool tolerance are discussed.
18723578	RACK1 functions in rice innate immunity by interacting with the Rac1 immune complex.	2008	Plant Cell	A small GTPase, Rac1, plays a key role in rice (Oryza sativa) innate immunity as part of a complex of regulatory proteins. Here, we used affinity column chromatography to identify rice RACK1 (for Receptor for Activated C-Kinase 1) as an interactor with Rac1. RACK1 functions in various mammalian signaling pathways and is involved in hormone signaling and development in plants. Rice contains two RACK1 genes, RACK1A and RACK1B, and the RACK1A protein interacts with the GTP form of Rac1. Rac1 positively regulates RACK1A at both the transcriptional and posttranscriptional levels. RACK1A transcription was also induced by a fungal elicitor and by abscisic acid, jasmonate, and auxin. Analysis of transgenic rice plants and cell cultures indicates that RACK1A plays a role in the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and in resistance against rice blast infection. Overexpression of RACK1A enhances ROS production in rice seedlings. RACK1A was shown to interact with the N terminus of NADPH oxidase, RAR1, and SGT1, key regulators of plant disease resistance. These results suggest that RACK1A functions in rice innate immunity by interacting with multiple proteins in the Rac1 immune complex.
22038138	The rice bright green leaf (bgl) locus encodes OsRopGEF10, which activates the development of small cuticular papillae on leaf surfaces.	2011	Plant Mol Biol	Development of specialized epidermal cells and structures plays a key role in plant tolerance to biotic and abiotic stresses. In the paddy field, the bright green leaf (bgl) mutants of rice (Oryza sativa) exhibit a luminous green color that is clearly distinguishable from the normal green of wild-type plants. Transmission and scanning electron microscopy revealed that small cuticular papillae (or small papillae; SP), nipple-like structures, are absent on the adaxial and abaxial leaf surfaces of bgl mutants, leading to more direct reflection and less diffusion of green light. Map-based cloning revealed that the bgl locus encodes OsRopGEF10, one of eleven OsRopGEFs in rice. RopGEFs (guanine nucleotide exchange factors for Rop) activate Rop/Rac GTPases, acting as molecular switches in eukaryotic signal transduction by replacing the bound GDP (inactive form) with GTP (active form) in response to external or internal cues. In agreement with the timing of SP initiation on the leaf epidermis, OsRopGEF10 is most strongly expressed in newly developing leaves before emergence from the leaf sheath. In yeast two-hybrid assays, OsRopGEF10 interacts with OsRac1, one of seven OsRac proteins; consistent with this, both proteins are localized in the plasma membrane. These results suggest that OsRopGEF10 activates OsRac1 to turn on the molecular signaling pathway for SP development. Together, our findings provide new insights into the molecular genetic mechanism of SP formation during early leaf morphogenesis.
